```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 4: Monitoring
-------------------------------

### Quality statement

People who have self‑harmed receive the monitoring they need while in
the healthcare setting, in order to reduce the risk of further
self‑harm*.*

### Rationale

Monitoring people who have self‑harmed when they are in a healthcare
setting can reduce distress, ensure that the person feels supported and
help reduce the risk of further self‑harm while in the healthcare
setting.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people who
have self‑harmed receive the monitoring they need while in the
healthcare setting, in order to reduce the risk of further self‑harm
while in the healthcare setting.

**Process:** Proportion of people who have self‑harmed who have a record
of monitoring arrangements while in the healthcare setting, in order to
reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator with a record of
monitoring arrangements while in the healthcare setting, in order to
reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

Denominator – the number of people with a new episode of self‑harm.

**Outcome:** Number of episodes of self‑harm occurring in healthcare
settings.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that staff carry out monitoring in the
healthcare setting according to the needs of people who have
self‑harmed, in order to reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that people who have self‑harmed
receive the monitoring they need while in the healthcare setting, in
order to reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that monitor
people who have self‑harmed according to their needs while in the
healthcare setting, in order to reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

**People who have self‑harmed** are checked regularly by healthcare
staff, and are accompanied when required, when they are in hospital or
another part of the health service, to make sure they are safe.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.4.2.3 (key
priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection. [NHS Litigation Authority risk
management standards](http://www.nhsla.com/Safety/Standards) assess the
process for managing the risks associated with the observation and
engagement of patients.

**Process:**Local data collection.

**Outcome:** Local data collection. The [National Reporting and Learning
System](http://www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/) contains national and local
figures on patient safety incidents including self‑harm.

### Definitions

#### People who have self‑harmed

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation.

#### Monitoring

Includes observation and accompaniment of people who have self‑harmed,
either by healthcare professionals or by their families or carers with
support from healthcare professionals.

Monitoring applies to people being treated in primary care, ambulance
services, emergency departments and inpatient settings.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.9.1.1
states that children and young people under 16 years who have
self‑harmed should be assessed and treated by appropriately trained
children's nurses and doctors in a separate children's area of the
emergency department.
