```
Setting:
  - "Community"
  - "Primary care setting"
  - "Care home"
  - "Hospice"
  - "Hospital"
Age Group:
  - "Older adults"
Condition Disease:
  - "Dementia"
Service area:
  - "Community health care"
  - "Primary care"
  - "Secondary medical care"
  - "Social care"

```
Quality statement 7: Non-cognitive symptoms and behaviour that challenges
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with dementia who develop non-cognitive symptoms that cause them
significant distress, or who develop behaviour that challenges, are
offered an assessment at an early opportunity to establish generating
and aggravating factors. Interventions to improve such behaviour or
distress should be recorded in their care plan.

### Quality measure

**Structure:**

​a) Evidence that people with dementia who develop non-cognitive
symptoms that cause them significant distress, or who develop behaviour
that challenges, are offered an assessment at an early opportunity.

​b) Evidence that individually tailored care plans, that help carers and
staff address the behaviour that challenges, are recorded in the notes
and reviewed regularly.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people with dementia who develop non-cognitive
symptoms that cause them significant distress, or who develop behaviour
that challenges, who receive an assessment to establish likely factors
that may generate, aggravate or improve such distress or behaviour.

Numerator – the number of people who receive an assessment.

Denominator – the number of people with dementia who develop
non-cognitive symptoms that cause them significant distress or who
develop behaviour that challenges.

​b) Proportion of people with dementia who develop non-cognitive
symptoms that cause them significant distress, or who develop behaviour
that challenges, with an individualised care plan identifying actions to
address the distress or behaviour.

Numerator – the number of people with an individualised care plan
identifying actions to address the distress or behaviour.

Denominator – the number of people with dementia who develop
non-cognitive symptoms that cause them significant distress or who
develop behaviour that challenges.

​c) Proportion of people with dementia with mild-to-moderate
non-cognitive symptoms who are prescribed anti-psychotic medication.
(Goal to be 0% reflecting the [Department of Health report on the use of
anti-psychotic medication for people with
dementia](http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130107105354/http:/www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_108303)
and its aim to reduce the use of anti-psychotic medication for people
with dementia.)

Numerator – the number of people prescribed anti-psychotic medication.

Denominator – the number of people with dementia with mild-to-moderate
non-cognitive symptoms.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers**ensure that all people with dementia who develop
non-cognitive symptoms that cause significant distress, or who develop
behaviour that challenges, are given a comprehensive assessment.

**Health and social care professionals** working with people with
dementia who develop non-cognitive symptoms carry out a comprehensive
assessment. A behavioural and functional analysis should be conducted by
health and social care professionals with specific skills, in
conjunction with carers and care workers, and an individually tailored
care plan should be developed to address the issues.

**Commissioners**ensure local service providers are adequately resourced
and trained to undertake comprehensive assessment and management of
people with non-cognitive symptoms of dementia.

**People with dementia** who develop non-cognitive symptoms that cause
them significant distress or who develop behaviour that challenges can
expect to be offered a comprehensive assessment at an early stage.

### Definitions

The assessment must include:

-   the person's physical health

-   depression

-   possible undetected pain or discomfort

-   side effects of medication

-   individual biography, including religious beliefs and spiritual and
    cultural identity

-   psychosocial factors

-   physical environmental factors

-   behavioural and functional analysis conducted by professionals with
    specific skills, in conjunction with carers and care workers.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:**

​a) and b) Local data collection. Contained within [NICE CG42 audit
support](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg42/resources/cg42-dementia-audit-support-update),
criterion 8.

​c) Local data collection. Acute Trusts can collect data on the main
recorded reason for any prescription of antipsychotic medication using
the [National Audit of
Dementia](http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry/qualityimprovement/nationalclinicalaudits/dementia/nationalauditofdementia/reportsandauditmaterials/audittoolsandstandards.aspx)
case note audit, section 2 (however, the audit is not specific to people
with mild-to-moderate non-cognitive symptoms).
