```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
```
Quality statement 1: Multidisciplinary teams for young people
-------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Young people (aged 16–24 years) with cancer have their diagnosis,
treatment and support agreed and delivered by a cancer-site-specific
multidisciplinary team and a teenage and young adult multidisciplinary
team.

### Rationale

Children's services have well-established models of care to ensure that
children with cancer are seen by a children's cancer multidisciplinary
team. However, there is variation in access to age-appropriate care for
young people. In addition to cancers more commonly found in their own
age group, young people can also experience cancers more common to
children or adults. It is therefore important for them to be seen by
both a cancer-site-specific multidisciplinary team and a teenage and
young adult multidisciplinary team, to ensure that they have a correct
diagnosis and receive the most effective treatment.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

Evidence of local arrangements for all young people (aged 16–24 years)
with cancer to have their diagnosis, treatment and support agreed and
delivered by a cancer-site-specific multidisciplinary team and a teenage
and young adult multidisciplinary team.

***Data source:***Local data collection.

#### Process

​a) The proportion of young people (aged 16–24 years) diagnosed with
cancer who have their diagnosis, treatment and support agreed by a
cancer-site-specific multidisciplinary team and a teenage and young
adult multidisciplinary team.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have their
diagnosis, treatment and support agreed by a cancer-site-specific
multidisciplinary team and a teenage and young adult multidisciplinary
team.

Denominator – the number of young people (aged 16–24 years) diagnosed
with cancer.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

​b) The proportion of young people (aged 16–24 years) with cancer who
have their treatment and support delivered by a cancer-site-specific
multidisciplinary team and a teenage and young adult multidisciplinary
team.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have their
treatment and support delivered by a cancer-site-specific
multidisciplinary team and a teenage and young adult multidisciplinary
team.

Denominator – the number of young people (aged 16–24 years) with cancer.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, health and social care practitioners, and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that cancer-site-specific multidisciplinary
teams and a teenage and young adult multidisciplinary team are in place
to agree and deliver the diagnosis, treatment and support for young
people (aged 16–24 years) with cancer.

**Health and social care practitioners** work collaboratively across
cancer-site-specific and teenage and young adult multidisciplinary teams
to agree and deliver the diagnosis, treatment and support for young
people (aged 16–24 years) with cancer.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission cancer services for young
people (aged 16–24 years) that include provision of cancer-site-specific
multidisciplinary teams and a teenage and young adult multidisciplinary
team for young people with cancer.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Young people** **with cancer** (aged 16–24 years) have their
diagnosis, treatment and support agreed and delivered by a team of
experts in the specific type of cancer that they have and a team of
experts in treating and supporting young people with cancer.

### Source guidance

-   [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes in
    children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). NICE
    cancer service guidance (2005), Multidisciplinary teams: page 93,
    paragraph 1; page 94, paragraphs 1 and 4; and Principal treatment
    centres: page 104, paragraph 2.

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement

#### Teenage and young adult multidisciplinary team

A dedicated multidisciplinary team with expertise in cancer-related
issues for teenagers and young adults, and their families and carers.
The composition of the multidisciplinary team varies depending on the
stage in the care pathway, but may include a:

-   lead oncologist/haematologist with experience in teenage and young
    adult cancer

-   principal treatment centre lead nurse

-   specialist nurse

-   psychologist or level 3 psychology support

-   young people's social worker

-   youth worker or activity coordinator

-   teenage and young adult key worker.

[Adapted from [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes
in children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp),
Multidisciplinary teams: page 92, table 4; and National Cancer Peer
Review Programme [Manual for cancer services: teenage and young adults
cancer measures](http://www.cquins.nhs.uk/?menu=resources) 11‑7D‑201
Lead clinician and core team membership]

#### Cancer-site-specific multidisciplinary team

A dedicated multidisciplinary team with specialist expertise in treating
cancer in specific sites. [Adapted from [Children and young people with
cancer: improving outcomes in children and young people with
cancer](/guidance/csgcyp), Multidisciplinary teams, page 94, paragraph
1]
