```
Setting:
  - "Hospital"
Age Group:
  - "Older adults"
Condition Disease:
  - "Dementia"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Secondary medical care"
   -"Urgent and emergency care"

```
Quality statement 8: Liaison services
-------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with suspected or known dementia using acute and general hospital
inpatient services or emergency departments have access to a liaison
service that specialises in the diagnosis and management of dementia and
older people's mental health.

### Quality measure

**Structure:**Evidence of local arrangements to provide a liaison
service specialising in the diagnosis and management of dementia and
older people's mental health.

**Process:**Proportion of people with suspected or known dementia using
acute and general hospital facilities that are assessed by a liaison
service that specialises in the diagnosis and management of dementia and
older people's mental health.

Numerator – the number of people who are assessed by a liaison service
that specialises in the diagnosis and management of dementia and older
people's mental health.

Denominator – the number of people with suspected or known dementia who
are admitted to acute or general hospital inpatient services or
attending emergency departments.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that a liaison service specialising in
dementia and older people's mental health is available in acute and
general hospital settings to assess inpatients and emergency department
attendances with suspected or confirmed dementia.

**Healthcare professionals** working in acute and general hospital
settings ensure they can access a liaison team that specialises in the
diagnosis and management of dementia and older people's mental health.

**Commissioners** ensure provision of a liaison service specialising in
dementia and older people's mental health to work across acute and
general hospital settings to assess people with suspected or known
dementia.

**People** **with suspected or known dementia** admitted to acute and
general hospital settings or attending emergency departments can expect,
if clinically appropriate, to receive an assessment by a liaison service
specialising in dementia and older people's mental health.

### Definitions

Local commissioning arrangements should decide the activity levels for
the liaison service.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection. Acute Trusts can collect data on
the composition of liaison teams using the [National Audit of
Dementia](http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry/qualityimprovement/nationalclinicalaudits/dementia/nationalauditofdementia/reportsandauditmaterials/audittoolsandstandards.aspx)
organisational checklist, section 9.

**Process:** Local data collection. Acute Trusts can collect data on
referrals to liaison teams using the [National Audit of
Dementia](http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/workinpsychiatry/qualityimprovement/nationalclinicalaudits/dementia/nationalauditofdementia/reportsandauditmaterials/audittoolsandstandards.aspx)
case note audit, section 4.
