
```
Setting:
  - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Older adults"
Condition Disease:
  - "Dementia"
Service area:
  - "Community health care"
  - "Primary care"
  - "Secondary medical care"

```
Quality statement 3: Written and verbal information
---------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People newly diagnosed with dementia and/or their carers receive written
and verbal information about their condition, treatment and the support
options in their local area.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure written
information on dementia is available to staff.

**Process:** Proportion of people newly diagnosed with dementia
receiving written and verbal information about their condition,
treatment and the support options in their local area.

Numerator – the number of people receiving written and verbal
information about their condition, treatment and the support options in
the local area.

Denominator – the number of people newly diagnosed with dementia.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that written information about dementia,
treatment and local area support options is available to staff.

**Health and social care professionals** provide written and verbal
information about dementia, treatment and local area support options
once a diagnosis of dementia is established.

**Commissioners**ensure that services make available written information
about dementia, treatment and local area support options.

**People newly diagnosed with dementia** can expect to be provided with
written and verbal information about their condition, treatment and the
support options in their local area.

### Definitions

Written information for patients can be found in the Department of
Health's [Who
cares?](http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130107105354/http:/www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_078093)
booklet. Information about NICE guidance, written specifically for
patients can be found in [Dementia: information for the
public](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg42/informationforpublic) (NICE
clinical guideline 42, 2006).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection. Acute Trusts, Primary Care Trusts
and Mental Health Trusts can demonstrate processes for developing
written information via [NHS Litigation Authority Risk Management
Standards 4, criterion
2](http://www.nhsla.com/Pages/Publications.aspx?library=safety%7cstandards).

**Process:** Local data collection.
