```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 7: Psychological interventions
------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People receiving continuing support for self‑harm have a discussion with
their lead healthcare professional about the potential benefits of
psychological interventions specifically structured for people who
self‑harm.

### Rationale

There is some evidence that psychological therapies specifically
structured for people who self‑harm can be effective in reducing
repetition of self‑harm. The decision to refer for psychological therapy
should be based on a discussion between the service user and healthcare
professional about the likely benefits.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to provide psychological
interventions specifically structured for people who self‑harm.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people receiving continuing support for self‑harm who
have a record of a discussion with their lead healthcare professional
about the potential benefits of psychological interventions specifically
structured for people who self‑harm.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have a record of
a discussion with their lead healthcare professional about the potential
benefits of psychological interventions specifically structured for
people who self‑harm.

Denominator – the number of people receiving continuing support for
self‑harm.

​b) Proportion of people who self‑harm who accept referral for
psychological intervention and receive at least 3 sessions of a
psychological intervention specifically structured for people who
self‑harm.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving at least 3
sessions of a psychological intervention specifically structured for
people who self‑harm.

Denominator – the number of people who self‑harm who accept referral for
psychological intervention.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that systems are in place for healthcare
professionals to refer people receiving continuing support for self‑harm
for 3 to 12 sessions of a psychological intervention specifically
structured for people who self‑harm.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that they discuss with people
receiving continuing support for self‑harm the potential benefits of
psychological interventions specifically structured for people who
self‑harm.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that discuss
potential benefits of psychological interventions specifically
structured for people who self‑harm with people receiving continuing
support for self‑harm and can refer them for 3 to 12 sessions.

**People who are having long‑term support after self‑harming**discuss
the possible benefits of psychological treatments for self‑harm with
their healthcare professional.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.4.8 (key
priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection.

### Definitions

#### People receiving continuing support for self‑harm

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation, and who are receiving longer‑term psychological treatment
and management. It includes people with both single and recurrent
episodes of self‑harm. It does not include people having immediate
physical treatment or management for self‑harm in emergency departments.

#### Lead healthcare professional

The professional with overall responsibility for the care and support of
a person who has self‑harmed. This could include, but is not limited to,
professionals from primary care and community mental health services.

#### Psychological interventions

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.4.8
states:

Consider offering 3 to 12 sessions of a psychological intervention that
is specifically structured for people who self‑harm, with the aim of
reducing self‑harm. In addition:

-   the intervention should be tailored to individual need, and could
    include cognitive‑behavioural, psychodynamic or problem‑solving
    elements

-   therapists should be trained and supervised in the therapy they are
    offering to people who self‑harm

-   therapists should also be able to work collaboratively with the
    person to identify the problems causing distress or leading to
    self‑harm.
