```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
```
Quality statement 6: Multidisciplinary heart failure team
---------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with chronic heart failure are cared for by a multidisciplinary
heart failure team led by a specialist and consisting of professionals
with appropriate competencies from primary and secondary care, and are
given a single point of contact for the team.

### Quality measure

**Structure:**

​a) Evidence of a local multidisciplinary heart failure team led by a
specialist and consisting of professionals with the appropriate
competencies from primary and secondary care.

​b) Evidence of local arrangements to ensure people with chronic heart
failure are given a single point of contact for the multidisciplinary
heart failure team.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure who are cared for by
a multidisciplinary heart failure team led by a specialist and
consisting of professionals with the appropriate competencies from
primary and secondary care.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator cared for by a
multidisciplinary heart failure team led by a specialist and consisting
of professionals with the appropriate competencies from primary and
secondary care.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure.

​b) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure given a single point
of contact for the multidisciplinary heart failure team.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator given a single point
of contact for the multidisciplinary heart failure team.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure cared for
by a multidisciplinary heart failure team.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure the multidisciplinary heart failure team is
led by a specialist and consists of professionals with appropriate
competencies from primary and secondary care, and that systems are in
place to provide those cared for with a single point of contact for the
team.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that people with chronic heart
failure are cared for by a multidisciplinary heart failure team and are
given a single point of contact for the team.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission a multidisciplinary heart
failure team led by a specialist and consisting of professionals with
appropriate competencies from primary and secondary care.

**People with chronic heart failure**are cared for by a heart failure
team and given a single person to contact from the team.

### Definitions

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) the term 'specialist'
denotes a physician with subspecialty interest in heart failure (often a
consultant cardiologist) who leads a specialist multidisciplinary heart
failure team of professionals with appropriate competencies from primary
and secondary care. The team will involve, where necessary, other
services (such as rehabilitation, tertiary care and palliative care) in
the care of individual patients.

Unless otherwise specified, within this quality standard, specialist
assessment or management refers to assessment or management by a
multidisciplinary heart failure team. The team will decide on the most
appropriate member to address a particular clinical problem, which may
mean the GP leading the care in consultation with other members of the
team.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.5.3.1
and appendix D – practical notes.

### Data sources

**Structure:** a) and b) Local data collection.

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection. Access to heart failure
liaison services is monitored by the [National heart failure
audit](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/nicor/audits/heartfailure) for people with
an unplanned admission to hospital with heart failure.
