```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Children"
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
```
Quality statement 5: Neuro-rehabilitation
-----------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Children and young people (aged 0–24 years) who have had a central
nervous system malignancy receive a specialist neuro-rehabilitation care
package.

### Rationale

All children and young people who have had cancer are likely to need
some form of rehabilitation. Many children and young people who have had
cancer affecting their central nervous system (such as brain tumours)
are likely to need complex rehabilitation over a long period of time
(for the rest of their lives for some people). Access to skilled
neuro-rehabilitation can make a significant difference, enabling
children and young people to become independent adults and reducing the
need for ongoing complex care packages.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that all children and young
people (aged 0–24 years) who have had a central nervous system
malignancy receive a specialist neuro-rehabilitation care package.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

#### Process

The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) who have
had treatment for a central nervous system malignancy who receive a
specialist neuro-rehabilitation care package.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving a
specialist neuro-rehabilitation care package.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
who have had treatment for a central nervous system malignancy.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that specialist neuro-rehabilitation care
packages are available for children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
who have had a central nervous system malignancy.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that children and young people (aged
0–24 years) who have had a central nervous system malignancy receive a
specialist neuro-rehabilitation care package.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that provide
specialist neuro-rehabilitation care packages for children and young
people (aged 0–24 years) who have had central nervous system malignancy.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Children and young people who have had cancer of the central nervous
system** (such as a brain tumour) are supported by a team of specialists
to help them recover as fully as possible (called neuro-rehabilitation).

### Source guidance

-   [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes in
    children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). NICE
    cancer service guidance (2005), Rehabilitation: page 69, paragraph
    2.

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement

#### Specialist neuro-rehabilitation care package

A package of support that takes into account the effects of the cancer
and treatment on neurological, physical, psychological and academic
function, recognising that these effects can become more evident over
time. The specialist team should cover but not be limited to: speech and
language therapy, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, neurology and
psychology (including neuropsychology). The rehabilitation programme
should continue for as long as it is needed and can make a difference.
[Adapted from [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes
in children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp).
Rehabilitation: page 68, paragraph 6]

### Equality and diversity considerations

When providing neuro-rehabilitation services for children and young
people with cancer, any potential difficulties in accessing services,
which may include distance, disability and financial barriers, should be
taken into account.
