```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
 - "Primary care setting"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
  - "Primary care"
```

Quality statement 7: Treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists and beta-blockers
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with chronic heart failure due to left ventricular systolic
dysfunction are offered angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (or
angiotensin II receptor antagonists licensed for heart failure if there
are intolerable side effects with angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors) and beta-blockers licensed for heart failure, which are
gradually increased up to the optimal tolerated or target dose with
monitoring after each increase.

### Quality measure

**Structure:**

​a) Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people with chronic
heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) are
offered angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (or angiotensin
II receptor antagonists [ARBs] licensed for heart failure if there are
intolerable side effects with ACE inhibitors) and beta-blockers licensed
for heart failure.

​b) Evidence of local arrangements to review people with chronic heart
failure due to LVSD after each increase up to the optimal tolerated or
target dose of ACE inhibitors (or ARBs) and beta-blockers.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD who are
prescribed ACE inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure if there
are intolerable side effects with ACE inhibitors).

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator prescribed ACE
inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure if there are intolerable
side effects with ACE inhibitors).

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure due to
LVSD.

​b) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD who are
prescribed beta-blockers licensed for heart failure.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator prescribed
beta-blockers licensed for heart failure.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure due to
LVSD.

​c) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD who are
prescribed both ACE inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure if
there are intolerable side effects with ACE inhibitors) and
beta-blockers licensed for heart failure.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator prescribed both ACE
inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure if there are intolerable
side effects with ACE inhibitors) and beta-blockers licensed for heart
failure.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure due to
LVSD.

​d) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD
prescribed either ACE inhibitors or ARBs licensed for heart failure who
are prescribed ACE inhibitors.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator prescribed ACE
inhibitors.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure due to
LVSD prescribed ACE inhibitors or ARBs licensed for heart failure.

​e) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD who are
prescribed ACE inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure) who reach
the optimal tolerated or target dose.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who reach the
optimal tolerated or target dose of ACE inhibitor or ARB.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure due to
LVSD who are prescribed ACE inhibitors or ARBs licensed for heart
failure.

​f) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD who are
prescribed beta blockers licensed for heart failure who reach the
optimal tolerated or target dose.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who reach the
optimal tolerated or target dose of beta blocker.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure due to
LVSD who are prescribed beta blockers licensed for heart failure.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place to offer ACE
inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure if there are intolerable
side effects with ACE inhibitors) and beta-blockers licensed for heart
failure to people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD and ensure
review after each increase in dose.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure they offer ACE inhibitors (or ARBs
licensed for heart failure if there are intolerable side effects with
ACE inhibitors) and beta-blockers licensed for heart failure to people
with chronic heart failure due to LVSD and review after each increase in
dose.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services that offer ACE
inhibitors (or ARBs licensed for heart failure if there are intolerable
side effects with ACE inhibitors) and beta-blockers licensed for heart
failure to people with chronic heart failure due to LVSD and review
after each increase in dose.

**People with chronic heart failure due to left ventricular systolic
dysfunction**(when the chamber that pumps blood around the body isn't
working as well as it should) are offered drugs called ACE inhibitors
and beta-blockers, and their symptoms are reviewed after each increase
in dose. People who have intolerable side effects with ACE inhibitors
are offered angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARBs for short) instead
of ACE inhibitors.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendations 1.2.2.2
(key priority for implementation), 1.2.2.5, 1.2.2.6, 1.2.2.7 (key
priority for implementation) and 1.2.2.8.

### Data source

**Structure:** a) and b) Local data collection.

**Process:**

​a) [QOF
HF3](https://mqi.ic.nhs.uk/Search.aspx?query=heart%25&ref=1.09.02.09) –
'The percentage of patients with a current diagnosis of heart failure
due to LVD who are currently treated with an ACE inhibitor or
Angiotensin Receptor Blocker, who can tolerate therapy and for whom
there is no contra-indication.'

​b) Local data collection.

​c) [QOF
HF4](https://mqi.ic.nhs.uk/Search.aspx?query=heart%25&ref=1.09.02.24) –
'The percentage of patients with a current diagnosis of heart failure
due to LVD who are currently treated with an ACE inhibitor or
Angiotensin Receptor Blocker, who are additionally treated with a
beta-blocker licensed for heart failure, or recorded as intolerant to or
having a contraindication to beta-blockers.' Also contained within [NICE
clinical guideline 108 audit
support](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG108/resources), criterion 6.

Prescription of core treatments recommended by NICE guidance is
monitored by the [National heart failure
audit](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/nicor/audits/heartfailure) for people with
an unplanned admission to hospital with heart failure.

​d) Local data collection.

​e) Local data collection. Contained within [NICE clinical guideline 108
audit support](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG108/resources),
criterion 7.

​f) Local data collection.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.2.2.7
promotes equality by highlighting certain groups for whom the provision
of beta-blockers has been poor in the past:

Offer beta-blockers licensed for heart failure to all patients with
heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction, including:

-   older adults **and**

-   patients with:

    -   peripheral vascular disease

    -   erectile dysfunction

    -   diabetes mellitus

    -   interstitial pulmonary disease and

-   chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) without reversibility.
