```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"

```
Quality statement 10: Management plans for people admitted to hospital
----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People admitted to hospital because of heart failure have a personalised
management plan that is shared with them, their carer(s) and their GP.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people
admitted to hospital because of heart failure have a personalised
management plan that is shared with them, their carer(s) and their GP.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people admitted to hospital because of heart failure
who have a personalised management plan when discharged.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator with a personalised
management plan when discharged.

Denominator – the number of people discharged after admission to
hospital because of heart failure.

​b) Proportion of people admitted to hospital because of heart failure
who have a personalised management plan shared with them, or their
carer(s), when discharged.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have a
personalised management plan shared with them, or their carer(s), when
discharged.

Denominator – the number of people discharged after admission to
hospital because of heart failure.

​c) Proportion of people admitted to hospital because of heart failure
whose GP is given their personalised management plan when discharged.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator whose GP is given
their personalised management plan.

Denominator – the number of people discharged after admission to
hospital because of heart failure.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place to share personalised
management plans with people admitted to hospital because of heart
failure, their carer(s) and their GP.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure personalised management plans are
shared with people admitted to hospital because of heart failure, their
carer(s) and their GP.

**Commissioners**ensure they commission services that share personalised
management plans with people admitted to hospital because of heart
failure, their carer(s) and their GP.

**People admitted to hospital because of heart failure**, their carer(s)
and their GP are provided with a copy of their personalised management
plan.

### Definitions

The management plan should include:

-   how to access advice

-   the main contact in the multidisciplinary heart failure team

-   information on medication

-   information on physical activity

-   information on managing fluid balance

-   details of follow-up appointments.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.5.2.2.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** a), b) and c) Local data collection.
