```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 1: Compassion, respect and dignity
----------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People who have self‑harmed are cared for with compassion and the same
respect and dignity as any service user.

### Rationale

Everyone who uses healthcare services should be treated with compassion,
respect and dignity. For people who have self‑harmed, however, staff
attitudes are often reported as contributing to poor experiences of
care. Punitive or judgemental staff attitudes can be distressing for
people who have self‑harmed and may lead to further self‑harm or
avoidance of medical attention.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to provide staff training
on treating people with compassion, respect and dignity that includes
specific reference to people who self‑harm.

**Process:** Proportion of staff in contact with people who have
self‑harmed who have received training on treating people with
compassion, respect and dignity that includes specific reference to
people who self‑harm.

Numerator – the number of staff in the denominator who have received
training on treating people with compassion, respect and dignity that
includes specific reference to people who self‑harm.

Denominator – the number of staff in contact with people who have
self‑harmed.

**Outcome:**Evidence from feedback that people who have self‑harmed feel
treated with compassion and the same respect and dignity as any service
user.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that training is provided on treating
people with compassion, respect and dignity that includes specific
reference to people who self‑harm.

**All staff**ensure that they treat people who have self‑harmed with
compassion and the same respect and dignity as any service user.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services in which all
staff who come into contact with people who have self‑harmed are trained
in treating people with compassion, respect and dignity that includes
specific reference to people who self‑harm.

**People who have self‑harmed**are cared for with compassion and the
same respect and dignity as any service user.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendations 1.1.1.1
(key priority for implementation) and 1.1.2.1 (key priority for
implementation).

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendations 1.1.1
(key priority for implementation), 1.1.9 and 1.1.10.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:**Local data collection.

**Outcome:** Local data collection. [NHS
Surveys](http://www.nhssurveys.org/) ask questions about dignity when
using services; however, data on diagnosis are not collected.

### Definitions

#### People who have self‑harmed

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation.

#### Staff

Everyone employed by or working in a service that provides care and
support for people who have self‑harmed. It is not restricted to
qualified healthcare professionals, and could include reception staff,
administrative staff and others. It applies to primary care, ambulance
services, emergency departments, community services and inpatient
settings.
