```
Setting:
 - "Primary care setting"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Primary care"
```
Quality statement 2: Measuring serum natriuretic peptides
---------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People presenting in primary care with suspected heart failure without
previous myocardial infarction have their serum natriuretic peptides
measured.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure serum
natriuretic peptide measurement is available in primary care for people
presenting with suspected heart failure without previous myocardial
infarction (MI).

**Process:** Proportion of people presenting in primary care with
suspected heart failure without previous MI who have their serum
natriuretic peptides measured before referral for specialist assessment
including echocardiography.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have their serum
natriuretic peptides measured before referral for specialist assessment
including echocardiography.

Denominator – the number of people presenting in primary care with
suspected heart failure without previous MI.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place to measure serum
natriuretic peptides in people presenting in primary care with suspected
heart failure without previous MI before referral for specialist
assessment including echocardiography.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure they measure serum natriuretic
peptides in people presenting in primary care with suspected heart
failure without previous MI before making a referral for specialist
assessment including echocardiography.

**Commissioners** ensure serum natriuretic peptide measurement is
available to primary care providers.

**People who go to their GP with symptoms of heart failure**but who
haven't had a heart attack in the past are offered a blood test to
measure levels of substances in the blood known as serum natriuretic
peptides to find out whether they should see a heart specialist.

### Definitions

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) the term 'specialist'
denotes a physician with subspecialty interest in heart failure (often a
consultant cardiologist) who leads a specialist multidisciplinary heart
failure team of professionals with appropriate competencies from primary
and secondary care. The team will involve, where necessary, other
services (such as rehabilitation, tertiary care and palliative care) in
the care of individual patients.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.1.1.3
(key priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection. Contained within [NICE clinical
guideline 108 audit
support](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG108/resources), criterion 2.
