```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
```
Quality statement 5: Education and self-management
--------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with chronic heart failure are offered personalised information,
education, support and opportunities for discussion throughout their
care to help them understand their condition and be involved in its
management, if they wish.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure people with
chronic heart failure are offered personalised information, education,
support and opportunities for discussion throughout their care to help
them understand their condition and be involved in its management, if
they wish.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people with chronic heart failure receiving
personalised information, education, support and opportunities to
discuss their care.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving
personalised information, education, support and opportunities to
discuss their care.

Denominator – the number of people with chronic heart failure.

​b) Evidence from experience surveys showing that people with chronic
heart failure feel they have been provided with personalised
information, education, support and opportunities for discussion
throughout their care to help them understand their condition and be
involved in its management, if they wished.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place to provide people with
chronic heart failure with personalised information, education, support
and opportunities for discussion throughout their care and to collect
feedback from people with chronic heart failure on their experience of
these systems.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure they offer personalised information,
education, support and opportunities for discussion throughout the care
of people with chronic heart failure.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services that offer
personalised information, education, support and opportunities for
discussion throughout the care of people with chronic heart failure.

**People with chronic heart failure** are offered personalised
information, education, support and opportunities for discussion
throughout their care so they can understand their condition and be
involved in its management, if they wish.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendations 1.4.1.4,
1.5.5.2, 1.5.5.3 and 1.5.5.6

### Data source

**Structure:**Local data collection.

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection.

### Equality and diversity considerations

The information provided should be culturally appropriate. It should
also be accessible to people with additional needs such as physical,
sensory or learning disabilities, and to people who do not speak or read
English. People with chronic heart failure should have access to an
interpreter or advocate if needed.
