```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Children"
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
```
Quality statement 2: Access to clinical trials
----------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer should be
offered the opportunity to take part in clinical trials if they are
eligible.

### Rationale

Involvement of children and young people with cancer in clinical trials
has made an important contribution to improved childhood cancer survival
rates. Multidisciplinary teams should identify suitable trials for
children and young people, and key workers should provide support to the
patient and their family in deciding whether to participate. The
decision to participate should be an informed choice.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that children and young people
(aged 0–24 years) are assessed for eligibility for relevant clinical
trials and offered the opportunity to take part.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

#### Process

​a) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer and eligible for a clinical trial who are offered the opportunity
to take part.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator offered the
opportunity to take part.

Denominator – children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer
and eligible for a clinical trial.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

​b) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer who are recruited into a clinical trial for which they are
eligible.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator recruited into the
clinical trial.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer and eligible for a clinical trial.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that multidisciplinary teams discuss the
eligibility of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer
for relevant clinical trials and promote participation in research and
development.

**Healthcare professionals** from the multidisciplinary teams identify
relevant clinical trials for children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer, assess eligibility and offer opportunities to take part.

**Commissioners**ensure that the cancer services they commission for
children and young people (aged 0–24 years) identify relevant clinical
trials and support participation.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Children and young people** **with cancer** are offered the
opportunity to take part in clinical trials (which carry out research
into new treatments) that have been identified as suitable for them and
are supported to participate in these trials if they want to.

### Source guidance

-   [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes in
    children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). NICE
    cancer service guidance (2005), Research: page 124, paragraph 2.

### Equality and diversity considerations

When providing support for children and young people to access clinical
trials any potential difficulties in participation, which may include
distance, disability and financial barriers, should be taken into
account.
