```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"

```
Quality statement 13: Specialist and palliative care for people with moderate to severe chronic heart failure
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with moderate to severe chronic heart failure, and their
carer(s), have access to a specialist in heart failure and a palliative
care service.

### Quality measure

**Structure:**

​a) Evidence of local arrangements to provide people with moderate to
severe chronic heart failure, and their carer(s), with access to a
specialist in heart failure.

​b) Evidence of local arrangements to provide people with moderate to
severe chronic heart failure, and their carers(s), with access to a
palliative care service.

**Process:**

​a) Evidence from experience surveys that people with moderate to severe
chronic heart failure, and their carer(s), felt they had access to a
specialist in heart failure.

​b) Evidence from experience surveys that people with moderate to severe
chronic heart failure, and their carer(s), felt they had access to a
palliative care service.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place for people with
moderate to severe chronic heart failure and their carer(s) to have
access to a specialist in heart failure and a palliative care service.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure people with moderate to severe
chronic heart failure and their carer(s) have access to a specialist in
heart failure and a palliative care service.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services providing people with
moderate to severe chronic heart failure and their carer(s) with access
to a specialist in heart failure and a palliative care service.

**People with moderate to severe chronic heart failure**and their
carer(s) have access to support from a heart specialist and an end of
life care (also called palliative care) service.

### Definitions

Referrals to the specialist in heart failure or the palliative care
service should only be made for appropriate patients who would benefit
from the services. Moderate to severe chronic heart failure refers to
people with chronic heart failure and moderate to severe symptoms
(typically progressive [NYHA classes III or
IV](http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/HeartFailure/AboutHeartFailure/Classes-of-Heart-Failure_UCM_306328_Article.jsp)).

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) the term 'specialist'
denotes a physician with subspecialty interest in heart failure (often a
consultant cardiologist) who leads a specialist multidisciplinary heart
failure team of professionals with appropriate competencies from primary
and secondary care.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendations 1.5.1.1,
1.5.9.2 and 1.5.9.3.

### Data source

**Structure:**

​a) Local data collection.

​b) Local data collection. GP practices collect data on the completeness
of a palliative care register for [QOF
PC3](https://mqi.ic.nhs.uk/Search.aspx?query=palliative&ref=1.03.02) –
'the practice has a complete register available of all patients in need
of palliative care/support irrespective of age'. GP practices also
collect data on case review meetings for [QOF
PC2](https://mqi.ic.nhs.uk/Search.aspx?query=palliative&ref=1.03.01) –
'the practice has regular (at least 3 monthly) multidisciplinary case
review meetings where all patients on the palliative care register are
discussed'.

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection. Information on access to
heart failure liaison services and palliative care is an outcome
monitored by the [National heart failure
audit](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/nicor/audits/heartfailure) for people with
an unplanned admission to hospital with heart failure.
