```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Children"
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
```
Quality statement 4: Psychological and social support
-----------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer, and their
families and carers, have their psychological and social needs assessed
at key points in their care pathway and receive support based on their
identified needs.

### Rationale

The impact of a diagnosis of cancer, its prognosis and its treatment can
be devastating and wide-ranging for children and young people, and their
families and carers. As the child or young person progresses through
their care pathway, their psychological and social needs, and those of
their family, are likely to change. To help address this, their
psychological and social support needs should be reassessed at key
points to inform their care plan and to assess the need for specialist
services such as psychologists.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

​a) Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that children and young
people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer, and their families and carers,
have their psychological and social needs assessed at key points on
their care pathway.

***Data source:***National Cancer Peer Review Programme [Manual for
cancer services: children's cancer
measures](http://www.cquins.nhs.uk/?menu=resources): 11-7B-322 PTC
psychosocial assessment guidelines.

​b) Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that children and young
people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer, and their families and carers, can
access services delivering psychological and social support.

***Data source:***National Cancer Peer Review Programme [Manual for
cancer services: children's cancer
measures](http://www.cquins.nhs.uk/?menu=resources): 11-7B-322 PTC
psychosocial assessment guidelines.

#### Process

​a) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway who have their
psychological and social needs assessed.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have their
psychological and social needs assessed.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

​b) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway whose family and
carers have their psychological and social needs assessed.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator whose family and
carers have their psychological and social needs assessed.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

​c) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway who receive support
with identified psychological or social needs.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving
psychological or social support.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway with identified
psychological or social needs.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

​d) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway whose family and
carers receive support with identified psychological and social needs.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving
psychological or social support.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer reaching a key point in their care pathway whose family and
carers have identified psychological or social needs.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

#### Outcome

Children and young people with cancer, and their families and carers,
feel supported during their care.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. National Cancer Peer Review
Programme [Manual for cancer services: teenage and young adults
measures](http://www.cquins.nhs.uk/index.php?menu=resources): 11-7D-210
TYA cancer measures patient experience exercise.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, health and social care practitioners, and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that the psychological and social needs of
children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer, and their
families and carers, are assessed at key points in their care pathway,
and that protocols are in place for referral to the appropriate
specialists, such as psychologists.

**Health and social care practitioners** carry out psychological and
social needs assessments for children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
with cancer, and their families and carers, at key points in their care
pathway, and use the results to inform the care plan and offer
appropriate specialist support.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that assess the
psychological and social needs of children and young people (aged 0–24
years), and their families and carers, at key points in their care
pathway. They should commission services to provide specialist
psychological and social support to children and young people with
cancer, and their families and carers.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Children and young people with cancer,** and their families and
carers, have their psychological and social needs assessed at different
stages during and after their treatment. These assessments should result
in a care plan that can be used to get extra help and support if they
need it.

### Source guidance

-   [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes in
    children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). NICE
    cancer service guidance (2005), Psychosocial care: page 74,
    paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4.

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement

#### Psychological and social needs assessment

An assessment of psychological and social support needs that includes:

-   patient information needs and coping skills that are age-appropriate

-   family information needs and coping skills

-   financial support

-   practical support

-   social and cultural circumstances

-   educational and employment needs

-   the needs of siblings

-   relationships with peers

-   spiritual needs.

The assessment should result in a care plan to meet the identified
needs, agreed with the child or young person, and their family or
carers. [Expert opinion and adapted from [Children and young people with
cancer: improving outcomes in children and young people with
cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). Psychosocial care: page 74, paragraph 4]

#### Key points in their care pathway

The key points in a care pathway when psychological and social needs
should be assessed are:

-   at diagnosis

-   during treatment

-   at the end of treatment

-   during long-term follow-up

-   at relapse

-   during palliative care

-   following bereavement (for families and carers).

[Adapted from [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes
in children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp).
Psychosocial care: page 74, paragraph 3]

#### Psychological and social support

Psychological and social support is the supportive care received by a
child or young person and their family or carers during active cancer
therapy and long-term follow-up, and it may include respite care,
palliative care and bereavement counselling for families and carers.
Psychological or social support may help with:

-   how the child or young person perceives the challenge of the
    disease, its symptoms and the side effects of treatment

-   problems experienced by the child or young person with body image,
    relationships with peers and potential partners, difficulties with
    schooling and other education, or difficulties with employment

-   the disruption of the normal transition for young people from
    dependence on their family to independence

-   the shock and grief a family experiences when a member of the family
    has a life-threatening illness.

[Adapted from [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes
in children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp),
Psychosocial support: page 73, paragraph 2]

### Equality and diversity considerations

When providing psychological and social support for children and young
people with cancer, any potential difficulties in accessing services,
which may include distance, disability and financial barriers, should be
taken into account.
