```
Setting:
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
  - "Primary care"
```
Quality statement 9: Monitoring stable chronic heart failure
------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with stable chronic heart failure receive a clinical assessment
at least every 6 months, including a review of medication and
measurement of renal function.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure people with
stable chronic heart failure receive a clinical assessment at least
every 6 months, including a review of medication and measurement of
renal function.

**Process:** Proportion of people with chronic heart failure receiving a
clinical assessment in the last 6 months, including a review of
medication and measurement of renal function.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving a clinical
assessment in the last 6 months, including a review of medication and
measurement of renal function.

Denominator – the number of people with stable chronic heart failure.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place for the clinical
assessment of people with stable chronic heart failure at least every 6
months, including a review of medication and measurement of renal
function.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure people with stable chronic heart
failure have a clinical assessment at least every 6 months, including a
review of medication and measurement of renal function.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services that provide a
clinical assessment for people with stable chronic heart failure at
least every 6 months, including a review of medication and measurement
of renal function.

**People with stable chronic heart failure**have a check-up at least
every 6 months, including a review of their drug treatment and tests to
make sure their kidneys are working properly.

### Definitions

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) states:

'All patients with chronic heart failure require monitoring. This
monitoring should include:

-   a clinical assessment of functional capacity, fluid status, cardiac
    rhythm (minimum of examining the pulse), cognitive status and
    nutritional status

-   a review of medication, including need for changes and possible side
    effects

-   serum urea, electrolytes, creatinine and eGFR\*.

\*This is a minimum. Patients with comorbidities or co-prescribed
medications will require further monitoring. Monitoring serum potassium
is particularly important if a patient is taking digoxin or an
aldosterone antagonist.'

Unless otherwise specified, within this quality standard, specialist
assessment or management refers to assessment or management by a
multidisciplinary heart failure team. The multidisciplinary heart
failure team will decide on the most appropriate member to perform
clinical reviews for people with stable chronic heart failure, which may
mean the GP leading the care in consultation with other members of the
team.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendations 1.4.1.1
and 1.4.1.3.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection. Contained within [NICE clinical
guideline 108 audit support](/guidance/cg108), criterion 17.
