```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"

```
Quality statement 11: Contribution of multidisciplinary heart failure team to management plans
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People admitted to hospital because of heart failure receive input to
their management plan from a multidisciplinary heart failure team.

### Quality measure

**Structure:**Evidence of local arrangements providing access to a
multidisciplinary heart failure team for advice on management plans for
people admitted to hospital because of heart failure.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people admitted to hospital because of heart failure
whose management plan includes advice from a multidisciplinary heart
failure team.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator whose management
plan includes advice from a multidisciplinary heart failure team.

Denominator – the number of people admitted to hospital because of heart
failure.

​b) Proportion of people admitted to hospital because of heart failure
seen by a specialist in heart failure.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator seen by a specialist
in heart failure.

Denominator – the number of people admitted to hospital because of heart
failure.

An audit standard of less than 100% is expected for process b) to
account for local service arrangements and appropriate use of resources.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place for hospital staff to
have access to a multidisciplinary heart failure team for advice on
management plans for people admitted to hospital because of heart
failure.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure they contact a multidisciplinary
heart failure team for advice on management plans for people admitted to
hospital because of heart failure.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services that give hospital
staff access to a multidisciplinary heart failure team for advice on
management plans for people admitted to hospital because of heart
failure.

**People admitted to hospital because of heart failure**receive input
from their heart failure team into their management plan.

### Definitions

As a minimum, the term 'receive input' should include documented
discussion with, or input from a member of, the multidisciplinary heart
failure team.

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) the term 'specialist'
denotes a physician with subspecialty interest in heart failure (often a
consultant cardiologist) who leads a specialist multidisciplinary heart
failure team of professionals with appropriate competencies from primary
and secondary care. The team will involve, where necessary, other
services (such as rehabilitation, tertiary care and palliative care) in
the care of individual patients.

Unless otherwise specified, within this quality standard, specialist
assessment or management refers to assessment or management by a
multidisciplinary heart failure team. The team will decide on the most
appropriate member to address a particular clinical problem.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.4.1.5
(key priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:**Local data collection.

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection.
