```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Children"
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
```
Quality statement 3: Electronic prescribing of chemotherapy
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Children and young people (aged 0–24 years) receiving chemotherapy have
it prescribed using an electronic prescribing system.

### Rationale

There are a number of risks associated with prescribing and
administering chemotherapy. Electronic prescribing of chemotherapy
should be used in all settings to help reduce the risks. However, at
present it is widely used in adult cancer care but not available in all
children's chemotherapy services. Chemotherapy regimens for children and
young people are varied and often very complex, and there is a high risk
of error in calculating the correct doses, fluid volumes and scheduling.
Drug dose and fluid volume calculations are based on weight and body
surface area. Electronic prescribing systems perform the calculations
and support safer prescribing.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that all children and young
people (aged 0–24 years) receiving chemotherapy have it prescribed using
an electronic prescribing system.

***Data source:***Local data collection. National Cancer Peer Review
Programme [Manual for cancer services: children's cancer
measures](http://www.cquins.nhs.uk/?menu=resources): 11-7B-161 Computer
generated prescriptions.

#### Outcome

The number of patient safety incidents in children and young people
(aged 0–24 years) related to chemotherapy prescriptions.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that an electronic prescribing system is in
place for children and young people (aged 0–24 years) receiving
chemotherapy.

**Healthcare professionals** use electronic prescribing systems for
prescribing chemotherapy regimens for children and young people (aged
0–24 years).

**Commissioners** work with service providers to ensure that children
and young people (aged 0–24 years) receiving chemotherapy have it
prescribed using an electronic prescribing system.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Children and young people with cancer** receiving chemotherapy have
the correct amount of drugs and fluids, and when to have them,
calculated by a computer-based prescribing system.

### Source guidance

-   [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes in
    children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). NICE
    cancer service guidance (2005), Chemotherapy: page 39, paragraph 4.

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement

#### Electronic prescribing system

A computer package that calculates the correct chemotherapy doses,
fluids and scheduling for each child and young person based on
previously entered and verified data. The system should be suitable for
use with paediatric chemotherapy regimens. [Expert opinion]
