```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
  - "Acute myocardial infarction"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
```
Quality statement 3: **2-week assessment and diagnosis**
--------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People referred for specialist assessment including echocardiography,
either because of suspected heart failure and previous myocardial
infarction or suspected heart failure and high serum natriuretic peptide
levels, are seen by a specialist and have an echocardiogram within 2
weeks of referral.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people
referred for specialist assessment including echocardiography, either
because of suspected heart failure and previous myocardial infarction
(MI) or suspected heart failure and high serum natriuretic peptide
levels, are seen by a specialist and have an echocardiogram within 2
weeks of referral.

**Process:**Proportion of people referred for specialist assessment
including echocardiography, either because of suspected heart failure
and previous MI or suspected heart failure and high serum natriuretic
peptide levels, who are seen by a specialist and have an echocardiogram
within 2 weeks of referral.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator seen by a specialist
and having an echocardiogram within 2 weeks of referral.

Denominator – the number of people referred for specialist assessment
including echocardiography either because of suspected heart failure and
previous MI or suspected heart failure and high serum natriuretic
peptide levels.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place for people with
suspected heart failure and previous MI or suspected heart failure and
high serum natriuretic peptide levels to be seen by a specialist and
have an echocardiogram within 2 weeks of referral.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure people referred because of suspected
heart failure and previous MI or suspected heart failure and high serum
natriuretic peptide levels are seen and have an echocardiogram within 2
weeks of referral.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services to provide specialist
assessment including echocardiography within 2 weeks of referral for
people with suspected heart failure and previous MI or suspected heart
failure and high serum natriuretic peptide levels.

**People referred urgently to a heart specialist**for assessment,
including an echocardiogram because of suspected heart failure, who have
either had a heart attack in the past or have high levels of serum
natriuretic peptides, are seen by a heart specialist and have an
echocardiogram within 2 weeks of referral.

### Definitions

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108):

-   Urgent specialist assessment and echocardiography within 2 weeks is
    recommended for people with suspected heart failure **and**

    -   a previous MI **or**

    -   high levels of serum natriuretic peptides – B-type natriuretic
        peptide (BNP) levels above 400 pg/ml (116 pmol/litre) or
        N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NTproBNP) levels
        above 2000 pg/ml (236 pmol/litre) in untreated patients. Lower
        natriuretic peptide thresholds should be considered for patients
        already on treatment appropriate for heart failure.

-   Echocardiography is defined as transthoracic Doppler 2D
    echocardiography.

-   The term 'specialist' denotes a physician with subspecialty interest
    in heart failure (often a consultant cardiologist) who leads a
    specialist multidisciplinary heart failure team of professionals
    with appropriate competencies from primary and secondary care. The
    team will involve, where necessary, other services (such as
    rehabilitation, tertiary care and palliative care) in the care of
    individual patients.

Ideally an echocardiogram should be performed at the same time as the
specialist assessment.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendations 1.1.1.2
and 1.1.1.4 (key priorities for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection. Contained within [NICE clinical
guideline 108 audit
support](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG108/resources), criterion 3.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.1.1.6
advises healthcare practitioners to be aware that:

-   obesity or treatment with diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme
    (ACE) inhibitors, beta-blockers, angiotensin II receptor antagonists
    (ARBs) and aldosterone antagonists can reduce levels of serum
    natriuretic peptides

-   high levels of serum natriuretic peptides can have causes other than
    heart failure (for example, left ventricular hypertrophy, ischaemia,
    tachycardia, right ventricular overload, hypoxaemia [including
    pulmonary embolism], renal dysfunction [GFR \< 60 ml/minute],
    sepsis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD], diabetes, age
    \> 70 years and cirrhosis of the liver).
