```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 6: Risk management plans
------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People receiving continuing support for self‑harm have a collaboratively
developed risk management plan.

### Rationale

A risk management plan can help people who self‑harm reduce their risk
of self‑harming again. It should be based on a risk assessment and
developed with the person who has self‑harmed, who should have joint
ownership of the plan. They should fully understand the content of the
plan, including what can be done if they are at risk of self‑harming
again and who to contact in a crisis.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people
receiving continuing support for self‑harm have a collaboratively
developed risk management plan.

**Process:** Proportion of people receiving continuing support for
self‑harm who have a collaboratively developed risk management plan.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have a
collaboratively developed risk management plan.

Denominator – the number of people receiving continuing support for
self‑harm.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that collaboratively developed risk
management plans are in place for people receiving continuing support
for self‑harm.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that people receiving continuing
support for self‑harm have a collaboratively developed risk management
plan.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that have
collaboratively developed risk management plans in place for people
receiving continuing support for self‑harm.

**People who are having long‑term support after self‑harming**have a
risk management plan developed with their healthcare professional that
helps them reduce their risk of harming themselves again.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendations 1.4.3
(key priority for implementation) and 1.4.4 (key priority for
implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection.

### Definitions

#### People receiving continuing support for self‑harm

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation, and are receiving longer‑term psychological treatment and
management. It includes people with both single and recurrent episodes
of self‑harm. It does not include people having immediate physical
treatment or management for self‑harm in emergency departments.

#### Risk management plan

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.4.4
states that a risk management plan should:

-   address each of the long‑term and more immediate risks identified in
    the risk assessment

-   address the specific factors (psychological, pharmacological, social
    and relational) identified in the assessment as associated with
    increased risk, with the agreed aim of reducing the risk of
    repetition of self‑harm and/or the risk of suicide

-   include a crisis plan outlining self‑management strategies and how
    to access services during a crisis when self‑management strategies
    fail

-   ensure that the risk management plan is consistent with the
    long‑term treatment strategy.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.3.3
highlights the higher risks of suicide following self‑harm in people
aged over 65 years. These risks should be reflected in risk management
plans.
