```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Children"
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
```
Quality statement 6: Follow-up and monitoring of late effects
-------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Children and young people (aged 0–24 years) who have been treated for
cancer have an end-of-treatment summary and care plan that includes
agreed follow-up and monitoring arrangements.

### Rationale

Children and young people who have had cancer are at risk of long-term
adverse effects from the cancer and its treatment. At the end of their
treatment they should be provided with verbal and written information
about the long-term risks of their cancer and treatment, and the
arrangements for monitoring and identifying potential problems and
treating them as quickly as possible.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that children and young people
(aged 0–24 years) who have been treated for cancer have an
end-of-treatment summary and care plan that includes agreed follow-up
and monitoring arrangements.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

#### Process

​a) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
completing treatment for cancer who have an end-of-treatment summary and
care plan.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have an
end-of-treatment summary and care plan.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
completing treatment for cancer.

​b) The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
treated for cancer who have their end-of-treatment summary and care plan
reviewed 5 years after the end of their initial treatment.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who have their
end-of-treatment summary and care plan reviewed 5 years after the end of
their initial treatment.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
treated for cancer with an end-of-treatment summary and care plan.

***Data source:*** a), b) Local data collection and National Cancer Peer
Review Programme [Manual for cancer services: children's cancer
measures](http://www.cquins.nhs.uk/index.php?menu=resources): 11-7B-211
Follow up and care planning decision, and 1-7B-212 Late effects MDT
follow up and long term sequelae protocol.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that services and systems are in place for
children and young people (aged 0–24 years) who have been treated for
cancer to have an end-of-treatment summary and care plan that includes
agreed follow-up and monitoring arrangements.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that children and young people (aged
0–24 years) who have been treated for cancer have an end-of-treatment
summary and care plan that includes agreed follow-up and monitoring
arrangements, and ensure that the plan is reviewed 5 years after the end
of initial treatment.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that provide
children and young people (aged 0–24 years) who have been treated for
cancer with an end-of-treatment summary and care plan that includes
agreed follow-up and monitoring arrangements. This should include
commissioning services with long-term follow-up clinics to deliver the
agreed care plan.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Children and young people** **who have had treatment for cancer**
should have a care plan developed at the end of their treatment. This
plan should include the treatment they have received, possible problems
that they may experience, details of future appointments that have been
agreed, how checks for possible problems should be carried out and who
to contact if they have any concerns after their treatment.

### Source guidance

-   Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) (2013) [Long term
    follow up of survivors of childhood
    cancer](http://www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/132/index.html)
    (SIGN clinical guideline 132), sections 3.6 (page 11, paragraph 5),
    11.2 (page 35, paragraph 4) and 11.3 (page 35, paragraph 6).

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement

#### End-of-treatment summary and care plan

A plan that should include details of:

-   treatment, including chemotherapeutic agents and their cumulative
    doses, radiotherapy and surgery

-   existing or potential late effects associated with the cancer or
    treatment

-   agreed follow-up, including where and with whom

-   monitoring for:

    -   relapse or recurrence

    -   immediate and late effects of treatment

    -   risk of second malignancy.

As a minimum, the care plan should be available and revised at:

-   the end of treatment

-   entry into long-term follow-up (usually 5 years after completing
    therapy) **and**

-   discharge from formal follow-up by the oncologist or the long-term
    follow-up clinic.

The care plan should also be used by key workers to support transition
from children's services to young people's services and from young
people's services to adult services. [Expert opinion]
