```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 2: Initial assessments
----------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People who have self‑harmed have an initial assessment of physical
health, mental state, safeguarding concerns, social circumstances and
risks of repetition or suicide.

### Rationale

An initial assessment can identify whether a person who has self‑harmed
is at immediate physical risk so that steps can be taken to reduce this
risk, including referral for more urgent care if indicated.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that initial
assessments of people who have self‑harmed include physical health,
mental state, safeguarding concerns, social circumstances and risks of
repetition or suicide.

**Process:**Proportion of people who have self‑harmed who have an
initial assessment of physical health, mental state, safeguarding
concerns, social circumstances and risks of repetition or suicide.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator with an initial
assessment of physical health, mental state, safeguarding concerns,
social circumstances and risks of repetition or suicide.

Denominator – the number of people with a new episode of self‑harm.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that people who have self‑harmed have an
initial assessment after an episode of self‑harm that includes physical
health, mental state, safeguarding concerns, social circumstances and
risk of further self‑harm or suicide.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that people who have self‑harmed have
an initial assessment after an episode of self‑harm that includes
physical health, mental state, safeguarding concerns, social
circumstances and risk of further self‑harm or suicide.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that undertake an
initial assessment of physical health, mental state, safeguarding
concerns, social circumstances and risk of further self‑harm or suicide
for people after an episode of self‑harm.

**People who have self‑harmed** have their physical health, mental
state, social circumstances and risks of repetition or suicide assessed
after an episode of self‑harm.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendations 1.2.1.1,
1.2.1.2, 1.3.1.1 and 1.4.1.1.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection.

### Definitions

#### People who have self‑harmed

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation.

#### Initial assessment

The first assessment by a healthcare professional after an episode of
self‑harm. It applies to people first seen in primary care, ambulance
services or emergency departments. It also applies to the first
assessment of episodes of self‑harm in inpatient settings. An initial
assessment should be undertaken each time a person presents with an
episode of self‑harm.

#### Physical health

Factors that should be recorded in an initial assessment of physical
health include, but are not limited to:

-   level of consciousness

-   physical injuries

-   level of pain

-   details of the nature and quantity of any overdose.

#### Mental state

Factors that should be recorded in an initial assessment of mental state
include, but are not limited to:

-   mental capacity

-   level of distress

-   presence of mental health problems

-   willingness to remain for further psychosocial assessment.

#### Safeguarding

The protection of vulnerable people from harm. It can apply to people of
all ages, including adults, older people, children and young people. It
includes consideration of risks to the person who has self‑harmed, any
children or adults in the person's care and to other family members or
significant others.

#### Social circumstances

Factors that should be recorded in an initial assessment of social
circumstances include, but are not limited to:

-   family members, significant others or carers who can provide support

-   dependants

-   housing

-   personal or financial problems.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.9.1.1
states that children and young people under 16 years who have
self‑harmed and present at the emergency department should be triaged,
assessed and treated by appropriately trained children's nurses and
doctors in a separate children's area of the emergency department.
