```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Children"
  - "Adults 18-24"
  - "Young people"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
Condition disease":
  - "Cancer"
  - "Fertility"
```
Quality statement 7: Fertility support
--------------------------------------

### Quality statement

Children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer are assessed for
potential future fertility problems and advised about their options for
fertility preservation before treatment is started.

### Rationale

The late effects of cancer treatment are well-recognised and involve
most organ systems. Approximately 15% of patients have a high risk of
future fertility problems because of their cancer treatment. Children
and young people with cancer and their parents or carers should have the
risks discussed with them and be advised about their options for
fertility preservation before cancer treatment starts.

### Quality measures

#### Structure

Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that children and young people
(0–24 years) with cancer are assessed for potential future fertility
problems and advised about their options for fertility preservation
before treatment is started.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

#### Process

The proportion of children and young people (aged 0–24 years) with
cancer who are assessed for potential future fertility problems and
advised about their options for fertility preservation before treatment
is started.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who are assessed for
potential future fertility problems before treatment and are advised
about their options for fertility preservation.

Denominator – the number of children and young people (aged 0–24 years)
diagnosed with cancer.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners

**Service providers** ensure that processes are in place for children
and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer to be assessed for
potential future fertility problems and advised about their options for
fertility preservation before treatment for cancer is started.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that children and young people (aged
0–24 years) with cancer are assessed for potential future fertility
problems before treatment for cancer is started and are advised about
their options for fertility preservation.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services that assess children
and young people (aged 0–24 years) with cancer for potential future
fertility problems before they start cancer treatment and advise them
about their options for fertility preservation.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers

**Children and young people with cancer** have the risk of future
fertility problems caused by their cancer or its treatment assessed
before their treatment is started, and are given advice about their
options for freezing some sperm, eggs or embryos for use at a later date
(called cryopreservation).

### Source guidance

-   [Children and young people with cancer: improving outcomes in
    children and young people with cancer](/guidance/csgcyp). NICE
    cancer service guidance (2005), Long-term sequelae: page 78,
    paragraph 8.

-   Fertility (NICE clinical guideline 156), recommendation
    [1.16.1.2](/guidance/cg156/chapter/recommendations#people-with-cancer-who-wish-to-preserve-fertility).
