```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
```
Quality statement 4: **6-week assessment and diagnosis**
--------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People referred for specialist assessment including echocardiography
because of suspected heart failure and intermediate serum natriuretic
peptide levels are seen by a specialist and have an echocardiogram
within 6 weeks of referral.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people
referred for specialist assessment including echocardiography because of
suspected heart failure and intermediate serum natriuretic peptide
levels are seen by a specialist and have an echocardiogram within 6
weeks of referral.

**Process:**Proportion of people referred for specialist assessment
including echocardiography because of suspected heart failure and
intermediate serum natriuretic peptide levels, who are seen by a
specialist and have an echocardiogram within 6 weeks of referral.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator seen by a specialist
and having an echocardiogram within 6 weeks of referral.

Denominator – the number of people referred for specialist assessment
including echocardiography because of suspected heart failure and
intermediate serum natriuretic peptide levels.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place for people with
suspected heart failure and intermediate serum natriuretic peptide
levels to be seen by a specialist and have an echocardiogram within 6
weeks of referral.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure people with suspected heart failure
and intermediate serum natriuretic peptide levels are seen by a
specialist and have an echocardiogram within 6 weeks of referral.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission services to provide specialist
assessment including echocardiography within 6 weeks of referral for
people with suspected heart failure and intermediate serum natriuretic
peptide levels.

**People referred to a heart specialist**for assessment, including an
echocardiogram, because of suspected heart failure and raised levels of
serum natriuretic peptides, are seen by a heart specialist and have an
echocardiogram within 6 weeks.

### Definitions

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108):

-   Specialist assessment within 6 weeks is recommended for people with
    suspected heart failure and intermediate levels of serum natriuretic
    peptides, that is BNP levels between 100 and 400 pg/ml (29–116
    pmol/litre) or NTproBNP levels between 400 and 2000 pg/ml (47–236
    pmol/litre) in untreated patients. Lower natriuretic peptide
    thresholds should be considered for patients already on treatment
    appropriate for heart failure.

-   Echocardiography is defined as transthoracic Doppler 2D
    echocardiography.

-   The term 'specialist' denotes a physician with subspecialty interest
    in heart failure (often a consultant cardiologist) who leads a
    specialist multidisciplinary heart failure team of professionals
    with appropriate competencies from primary and secondary care. The
    team will involve, where necessary, other services (such as
    rehabilitation, tertiary care and palliative care) in the care of
    individual patients.

Ideally echocardiography should happen at the same time as the
specialist assessment.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.1.1.5.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection. Contained within [NICE clinical
guideline 108 audit support](/guidance/cg108), criterion 4.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.1.1.6
advises healthcare practitioners to be aware that:

-   obesity or treatment with diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme
    (ACE) inhibitors, beta-blockers, angiotensin II receptor antagonists
    (ARBs) and aldosterone antagonists can reduce levels of serum
    natriuretic peptides.

-   raised levels of serum natriuretic peptides can have causes other
    than heart failure (for example, left ventricular hypertrophy,
    ischaemia, tachycardia, right ventricular overload, hypoxaemia
    [including pulmonary embolism], renal dysfunction [GFR \< 60
    ml/minute], sepsis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD],
    diabetes, age \> 70 years and cirrhosis of the liver).
