```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 3: Comprehensive psychosocial assessments
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People who have self‑harmed receive a comprehensive psychosocial
assessment.

### Rationale

A comprehensive psychosocial assessment is aimed at identifying personal
factors that might explain an act of self‑harm. It should be carried out
each time a person presents with an episode of self‑harm. It can start a
therapeutic relationship with the healthcare professional and be used to
form an effective management plan.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that healthcare
professionals either undertake comprehensive psychosocial assessments
with people who have self‑harmed or refer them to a specialist mental
health professional for the assessment.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people who have self‑harmed who either receive a
comprehensive psychosocial assessment or are referred to a specialist
mental health professional for the assessment.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving a
comprehensive psychosocial assessment or referred to a specialist mental
health professional for the assessment.

Denominator – the number of people with a new episode of self‑harm.

​b) Proportion of people who have self‑harmed and are referred to a
specialist mental health professional for a comprehensive psychosocial
assessment who receive a comprehensive psychosocial assessment.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator receiving a
comprehensive psychosocial assessment.

Denominator – the number of people who have self‑harmed and are referred
to a specialist mental health professional for a comprehensive
psychosocial assessment.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that systems are in place for healthcare
professionals to undertake comprehensive psychosocial assessments for
people who have self‑harmed or refer them to a specialist mental health
professional for the assessment.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that people are offered a
comprehensive psychosocial assessment or are referred to a specialist
mental health professional for the assessment after an episode of
self‑harm.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that provide
comprehensive psychosocial assessments for people after an episode of
self‑harm.

**People who have**self‑harmed are offered a comprehensive psychosocial
assessment that considers their needs, social situation, psychological
state, reasons for harming themselves, feelings of hopelessness,
depression or other mental health problems and any thoughts of suicide.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendations 1.7.2.1
(key priority for implementation) and 1.7.3.1 (key priority for
implementation).

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendations 1.3.1 to
1.3.6.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection.

### Definitions

#### People who have self‑harmed

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation.

#### Specialist mental health professional

A health professional employed to provide expertise in mental
healthcare.

#### Comprehensive psychosocial assessment

[NICE clinical guidelines 16](/guidance/cg16) and [133](/guidance/cg133)
state that a psychosocial assessment is the assessment of needs and
risks to understand and engage people who self‑harm and initiate a
therapeutic relationship. Recommendations 1.3.1 to 1.3.6 in [NICE
clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) give further details on
undertaking comprehensive psychosocial assessments. The comprehensive
psychosocial assessment should be offered to people being treated in
primary care, emergency departments and inpatient settings, and may
require referral to a specialist mental health professional.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.9.1.10
states that children and young people should be assessed by
professionals experienced in the assessment of children and young people
who self‑harm.

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.9.1.10 and
[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.3.4
state that assessment of children and young people should follow the
same principles as for adults, but should also include a full assessment
of the family, their social situation and child protection issues.

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.10.1.1 and
[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.3.3
state that older people (over 65 years) should be assessed by
professionals experienced in the assessment of older people who
self‑harm.

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.10.1.1
states that assessment of older people should follow the same principles
as for adults, but should also pay attention to the potential presence
of depression, cognitive impairment or physical ill health, and include
a full assessment of their home and social situation.
