```
Setting:
 - "Outpatient clinic"
 - "Primary care setting"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
Service area:
  - "Secondary medical care"
  - "Primary care"
```
Quality statement 8: Cardiac rehabilitation programme
-----------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People with stable chronic heart failure and no precluding condition or
device are offered a supervised group exercise-based cardiac
rehabilitation programme that includes education and psychological
support.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure the availability
of a supervised group exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme
that includes education and psychological support for people with stable
chronic heart failure.

**Process:**

​a) Proportion of people with stable chronic heart failure and no
precluding condition or device who attend a supervised group
exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme that includes education
and psychological support.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator attending a
supervised group exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme that
includes education and psychological support.

Denominator – the number of people with stable chronic heart failure and
no condition or device that precludes them from exercise-based cardiac
rehabilitation.

​b) Proportion of people with stable chronic heart failure and no
precluding condition or device who complete a supervised group
exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme that includes education
and psychological support.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator completing a
supervised group exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme that
includes education and psychological support.

Denominator – the number of people with stable chronic heart failure and
no condition or device that precludes them from exercise-based cardiac
rehabilitation.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place for people with stable
chronic heart failure and no precluding condition or device to attend a
supervised group exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme that
includes education and psychological support.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure people with stable chronic heart
failure and no precluding condition are offered a supervised group
exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation programme that includes education
and psychological support.

**Commissioners** ensure they commission supervised group exercise-based
cardiac rehabilitation programmes for people with chronic heart failure
that include education and psychological support.

**People with chronic heart failure** are offered a supervised group
exercise-based rehabilitation programme that includes information and
psychological support, if it is suitable for them.

### Definitions

The Guideline Development Group for NICE clinical guideline 108 noted
that 'the majority of programmes [reviewed in the evidence update]
included group exercises which also provided the patients with support
and educational opportunities, through formal counselling, as well as
iterative learning about their condition and how to cope with it'.

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) states that the
conditions and devices that may preclude an exercise-based
rehabilitation programme include:

-   uncontrolled ventricular response to atrial fibrillation

-   uncontrolled hypertension

-   high-energy pacing devices set to be activated at rates likely to be
    achieved during exercise.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.3.1.1
(key priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection. Information on exclusion policies
and reasons for referral to cardiac rehabilitation programmes is
monitored by the [National audit of cardiac
rehabilitation](http://www.cardiacrehabilitation.org.uk/nacr/index.htm).

**Process:** a) and b) Local data collection.

### Equality and diversity considerations

Consideration should be given to people with conditions or devices
precluding exercise-based programmes. These preclusions may legitimately
exclude some people from such rehabilitation programmes.
