```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 8: Moving between services
--------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People receiving continuing support for self‑harm and moving between
mental health services have a collaboratively developed plan describing
how support will be provided during the transition.

### Rationale

Moving to different mental health services (for example, from services
for young people to services for adults) can be a difficult period for
people who self‑harm. Unless there are plans to manage these
transitions, service users can feel isolated and unsupported, and be at
increased risk of further self‑harm. It is important that service users
are involved in agreeing how their support will be managed and
understand who they can contact in a crisis.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that providers
collaboratively plan in advance and coordinate effectively when people
who have self‑harmed move between mental health services.

**Process:**Proportion of people receiving continuing support for
self‑harm and moving between mental health services who have a
collaboratively developed plan describing how support will be provided
during the transition.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator with a
collaboratively developed plan describing how support will be provided
during the transition.

Denominator – the number of people receiving continuing support for
self‑harm and moving between mental health services.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that systems are in place to coordinate
effectively with other providers when people who have self‑harmed move
between mental health services.

**Healthcare professionals**ensure that people receiving continuing
support for self‑harm and moving between mental health services have a
collaboratively developed plan describing how support will be provided
during the transition.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that provide
people receiving continuing support for self‑harm and moving between
mental health services with a collaboratively developed plan describing
how support will be provided during the transition.

**People who are having long‑term support after self‑harming and are
moving between mental health services**agree a plan with their
healthcare professionals that describes how they will be supported while
they move from one service to another.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 133](/guidance/cg133) recommendation 1.1.25.

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:**Local data collection.

### Definition

#### People moving between mental health services for continuing support for self‑harm

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation, who are receiving longer‑term psychological treatment and
are moving from child and adolescent to adult mental health services, or
from one adult mental health service to another. Continuing support
refers to longer‑term psychological treatment and management. It
includes people with both single and recurrent episodes of self‑harm. It
does not include people having immediate physical treatment or
management for self‑harm in emergency departments.
