```
Setting:
 - "Primary care setting"
Age Group:
  - "Adults 65+"
Condition Disease:
  - "Heart failure"
  - "Acute myocardial infarction"
Service area:
  - "Primary care"
```

Quality statement 1: Urgent referral for people with previous myocardial infarction
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People presenting in primary care with suspected heart failure and
previous myocardial infarction are referred urgently, to have specialist
assessment including echocardiography within 2 weeks.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people
presenting in primary care with suspected heart failure and previous
myocardial infarction (MI) are referred urgently, to have specialist
assessment including echocardiography within 2 weeks.

**Process:** Proportion of people presenting in primary care with
suspected heart failure and previous MI who are referred urgently, to
have specialist assessment including echocardiography, with the referral
indicating previous MI.

Numerator – the number of people in the denominator who are referred
urgently, to have specialist assessment including echocardiography, with
the referral indicating previous MI.

Denominator – the number of people presenting in primary care with
suspected heart failure and previous MI.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure systems are in place to refer urgently
people with suspected heart failure and previous MI, to have specialist
assessment including echocardiography within 2 weeks.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure they refer urgently people with
suspected heart failure and previous MI, to have specialist assessment
including echocardiography within 2 weeks.

**Commissioners** ensure that services refer urgently people with
suspected heart failure and previous MI, to have specialist assessment
including echocardiography within 2 weeks.

**People who go to their GP with symptoms of heart failure** and who
have had a heart attack in the past are referred urgently for assessment
by a heart specialist, including an echocardiogram (a test that uses
ultrasound to view the heart), within 2 weeks.

### Definitions

In [NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108):

-   Echocardiography is defined as transthoracic Doppler 2D
    echocardiography.

-   The term 'specialist' denotes a physician with subspecialty interest
    in heart failure (often a consultant cardiologist) who leads a
    specialist multidisciplinary heart failure team of professionals
    with appropriate competencies from primary and secondary care. The
    team will involve, where necessary, other services (such as
    rehabilitation, tertiary care and palliative care) in the care of
    individual patients.

Ideally an echocardiogram should be performed at the same time as the
specialist assessment.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 108](/guidance/cg108) recommendation 1.1.1.2
(key priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection.

**Process:** Local data collection. Contained within [NICE clinical
guideline 108 audit
support](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG108/resources), criterion 1.

GP practices collect data on patients with diagnosed heart failure
having a confirmation echocardiogram or specialist assessment for [QOF
HF2](https://mqi.ic.nhs.uk/Search.aspx?query=heart%25failure&ref=1.09.02.08)
– 'The percentage of patients with a diagnosis of heart failure
(diagnosed after 1 April 2006) which has been confirmed by an
echocardiogram or by specialist assessment'. However this data does not
examine whether the patient has had a previous MI or was referred
urgently.
