```
Setting:
 - "Hospital"
 - "Primary care setting"
 - "Community"
Age Group:
  - "All age groups"
Service area:
  - "Mental health care"
  - "Primary care"
Condition disease":
  - "Self-harm"

```
Quality statement 5: Safe physical environments
-----------------------------------------------

### Quality statement

People who have self‑harmed are cared for in a safe physical environment
while in the healthcare setting, in order to reduce the risk of further
self‑harm.

### Rationale

Caring for people who have self‑harmed in a safe physical environment
within the healthcare setting can reduce distress, help them to feel
supported and reduce the risk of further self‑harm in the healthcare
setting.

### Quality measure

**Structure:** Evidence of local arrangements to undertake environmental
assessments of healthcare settings, including assessing the risks to
people who have self‑harmed.

**Outcome:** Number of episodes of self‑harm occurring in healthcare
settings.

### What the quality statement means for each audience

**Service providers** ensure that they undertake environmental
assessments to ensure that healthcare settings are safe for people who
have self‑harmed and to reduce the risk of further self‑harm while in
the healthcare setting.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that people who have self‑harmed are
cared for in a safe physical environment while in the healthcare setting
to reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that provide safe
physical environments in healthcare settings for people who have
self‑harmed to reduce the risk of further self‑harm.

**People who have self‑harmed** are cared for in a safe physical
environment that reduces the risk of harming themselves further while in
hospital or another part of the healthcare service.

### Source guidance

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.4.2.3 (key
priority for implementation).

### Data source

**Structure:** Local data collection. [NHS Litigation Authority risk
management standards](http://www.nhsla.com/Safety/Standards) assess the
process for managing the risks associated with the physical security of
premises and assets.

**Outcome:** Local data collection. [NHS
Surveys](http://www.nhssurveys.org/) ask questions about the environment
of services; however, data on diagnosis are not collected. The [National
Reporting and Learning System](http://www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/) contains
national and local figures on patient safety incidents, including
self‑harm.

### Definitions

#### People who have self‑harmed

Children or young people (aged 8 years and older) and adults who have
carried out an act of self‑poisoning or self‑injury, irrespective of
motivation.

#### Safe physical environment

People who have self‑harmed should be offered an environment that is
safe, supportive and minimises any distress.

Examples of environmental risks to people who self‑harm include, but are
not limited to:

-   ligature points

-   open windows

-   access to sharps

-   access to medication.

Consideration should be given to the individual needs and safety
requirements of each service user.

A safe physical environment refers to primary care settings, ambulance
services, emergency departments and inpatient settings where people who
have self‑harmed are being cared for.

### Equality and diversity considerations

[NICE clinical guideline 16](/guidance/cg16) recommendation 1.9.1.1
states that children and young people under 16 years who have
self‑harmed should be assessed and treated by appropriately trained
children's nurses and doctors in a separate children's area of the
emergency department.
